ACADEMIC CALENDAR AUTHORING
Version 1.0

Use this guide when a teacher has their district academic calendar as a PDF or a web page — which
is how it always arrives — and needs it as the CSV the Calendar page imports. Your job is to turn
pasted district text into that CSV, then walk the teacher through preview and apply. The pasted
text is input to you and is never stored: only the short public labels and structured dates you
produce end up in the calendar.

Read "Author a Class Schedule" beside this file for Bell Schedules, the Teacher Schedule, and the
day-change operations. This file covers the academic-calendar import only.

WHAT IMPORT DOES, AND WHAT IT DOES NOT

Import parses. It writes nothing. A parsed CSV fills in the Create / replace school year form on
the Calendar page — the no-school dates, their labels, and the grading periods — and no calendar
file changes until the teacher runs the year preview and then apply. Say that plainly, so "it
imported" is never mistaken for "it saved."

Import also recognizes exactly two kinds of fact: no-school dates and grading periods. It has no
way to express an instructional day, a bell schedule, a day when students are present but classes
do not meet, or a public event. Those are separate operations, covered near the end of this file.

There is no import tool over MCP. The CSV is a teacher-facing artifact for the Calendar page's
paste box. If you are connected as a tool provider you can skip the CSV entirely and pass the same
facts as arguments to preview_school_calendar_replacement — but write the CSV anyway when the
teacher wants a file they can keep, re-import, or hand to a colleague.

THE CANONICAL EIGHT-COLUMN FORMAT

Prefer this one. Write the header exactly:

  school_year,row_type,code,name,start_date,end_date,report_issue_date,basis

row_type is matched against a closed set, after trimming and lowercasing. Three values mean no
school for students:

  Holiday
  No School for Students
  Holiday for Students/Teachers

One value means a grading period:

  Academic Period

Matching is otherwise exact. A row_type of Student Day Off, Staff Development, Early Release, or
Teacher Workday is not recognized in this format; that row is skipped and named in the
skipped-row notes. Use one of the four values above and put the district's own wording in the
name column instead.

The other columns:

  code                used verbatim when you supply one, and derived from the name when you leave
                      it empty — see the derivation under the Simple format below. Supply one
                      anyway, because derived codes are long and depend on wording. Keep them
                      short and stable: Q1, T3, SIX2. Leave the cell empty on no-school rows,
                      where it goes unused.
  name                the label the teacher sees on that date or period. Required on Academic
                      Period rows. On a no-school row it becomes that date's label, and an empty
                      one falls back to "No school".
  start_date          required on every row.
  end_date            required on every row. A no-school row is an inclusive range and expands to
                      every calendar date in it, weekends included, which is harmless because
                      weekends are already no-school. One row covers a whole break.
  report_issue_date   optional, and read on Academic Period rows only. Leave it empty rather than
                      inventing one.
  basis               an optional note on where the fact came from. Nothing reads it and nothing
                      stores it. Useful to the teacher, invisible to the calendar.
  school_year         keep the column, since the header is fixed, but nothing reads it either. The
                      school year that gets stored is the one passed to the preview.

THE SIMPLE FOUR-COLUMN FORMAT

Header, exactly:

  Category,Name,Start Date,End Date

Take this format when the teacher already keeps a spreadsheet in it. Category is matched by
substring rather than against the closed set above, which makes it looser:

  contains "holiday", "day off", or "no school"   →  no-school dates
  contains "academic period"                     →  grading period

So "Holiday", "Student Day Off", "No School for Students", and "Staff Day Off" all land. A
category outside those words — "Early Release", "Staff Development", "Pep Rally" — does not, and
comes back named in the skipped-row notes rather than disappearing.

There is no code column, so import derives a code for each period: the name uppercased, every run
of characters outside A-Z and 0-9 collapsed to a single underscore, leading and trailing
underscores removed. "Term 1 / Report Card 1" becomes TERM_1_REPORT_CARD_1. An empty name becomes
PERIOD. Repeats take _2, _3, and so on in source order. It is deterministic, so the same file
imports to the same codes every time — but the codes are long and depend on wording, so the
canonical format is better whenever the teacher will ever see or refer to a code.

There is no report_issue_date column either. This format cannot carry report-card dates at all.

HOW THE FORMAT IS DETECTED, AND HOW A ROW GOES MISSING

The header row decides, and only the header row: canonical when it contains both row_type and
start_date, compared after trimming and lowercasing. Anything else is read as Simple.

Column names are matched the same forgiving way, so Row_Type, row_type, and a space-padded
" Start Date " all read correctly. What is not forgiven is a genuinely different name. The
canonical spelling separates words with underscores and the Simple spelling separates them with
spaces, so a Simple file whose header says Start_Date matches neither format's expected column.
Write the advertised header and the question never arises.

A row is skipped when its row_type or Category matches nothing, or when a date is missing or
unreadable. Import does not fail for those. It returns a note naming the source row number and
the value it could not use, and the Calendar page lists those notes under the paste box.

So read the counts and any notes back to the teacher every time. A zero count is a defect in your
CSV, not a fact about their year.

DATES

Both dates accept ISO YYYY-MM-DD or source-calendar MM/DD/YYYY, and both are stored as ISO. Write
ISO when you can; you are usually resolving a bare "Aug 19" or "12/22 - 1/2" out of the pasted
text anyway, and a district calendar that crosses a year boundary needs you to supply the right
year on each side. Never leave a range inside a single cell, and never write a date with no year.

BEFORE A YEAR CAN BE CREATED

Order matters here, and it catches people. A complete year needs a default_schedule_id naming a
Bell Schedule that is already loaded from the teacher's workspace Calendars folder, and preview
refuses one that is not loaded. So at least one Bell Schedule CSV has to exist there before the
first school year can exist. The academic-calendar CSV cannot supply it.

A Bell Schedule is any CSV in that folder whose filename begins with "Bell Schedule". Its
schedule_id is the filename without .csv, lowercased, with each run of other characters replaced
by an underscore: "Bell Schedule - A Day.csv" is bell_schedule_a_day. Call get_bell_schedule with
no argument to list what is actually loaded and use an id from that list. Never invent one, and
never derive one from a filename you have not seen.

When one weekday always runs a different schedule — a Friday assembly schedule, a late-start
Wednesday — put it in weekday_schedules, keyed 0 for Monday through 4 for Friday. It overrides the
default for that weekday across the whole coverage range, and the Calendar page offers the same
thing as a per-weekday select beside the default. Weekends are generated and carry no schedule, so
they have no keys. A weekday that varies date by date is a day change, not a weekday default.

The other thing that catches people: every date inside coverage that is not a weekend and not an
explicit no-school date becomes an instructional day on the default schedule. Coverage of a full
July-to-June year therefore turns both summer stretches into school days unless you write
no-school rows for them. Either narrow coverage to the student year, or add an explicit row for
each out-of-session stretch. Do not leave it to be discovered in October.

THE SEQUENCE

1. The teacher pastes the district calendar text. Ask for whatever it does not carry: the
   school-year label, coverage start and end, and which Bell Schedule is the ordinary day.
2. You write one complete CSV and show it in full. Where the pasted text was ambiguous, ask
   before writing that row — see AMBIGUITY below.
3. The CSV reaches the calendar one of two ways. Without tools: the teacher opens Calendar,
   expands "Start from an academic-calendar CSV", pastes it, and clicks "Parse into the form
   below", which fills in the no-school dates and grading periods. With tools: skip the box and
   call preview_school_calendar_replacement with school_year, coverage_start, coverage_end,
   default_schedule_id, no_school_dates, date_labels, and grading_periods.
4. Read the preview back to the teacher in plain language before applying anything. It returns
   operation ("create" when no calendar exists yet, else "replace"), base_revision (0 for a
   first-ever calendar), the current and proposed school year and coverage, day, grading-period,
   and event counts, material change counts, and a preview_digest. A replacement overwrites every
   date in the new coverage, so say so and get their confirmation.
5. Call apply_school_calendar_replacement with that same preview object and expected_revision set
   to its base_revision. A stale revision or an altered digest is refused rather than silently
   written — preview again if that happens. There is no partial creation: a full year validates
   and writes as one unit.

WHAT DOES NOT BELONG IN THE CSV

Early release. Students attend, so it is an instructional day on a shorter Bell Schedule — not a
no-school date and not an import row. It needs a Bell Schedule CSV for the short day, then
preview_school_calendar_change with kind instructional and that schedule_id for the date.

Students present but ordinary class blocks not meeting — a field day, a testing morning, a
schoolwide activity day. That is kind no_regular_classes, and only the change operation can set
it; a label is required. Import cannot produce it at all. The two non-instructional kinds stay
distinct on purpose, in the UI and in classroom messages: a field day is never called a holiday.

Public events — games, assemblies, performances, tutorials. Those have their own preview/apply
pair, and an event never changes a day's kind or schedule. A pep-rally event and a pep-rally Bell
Schedule are two separate facts.

Staff-only days do belong in the CSV, because students do not attend — just not as "Holiday".
Use No School for Students and keep the district's own wording in name, so the day reads as Staff
Development rather than as a holiday nobody got.

AMBIGUITY

Ask rather than guess. A calendar is a year of date math for late work, grading periods, and
classroom displays, and one wrong row is wrong every day it is read. The usual ones:

  * A day labeled only "No school" or "Holiday" with no audience named — students only, or
    everyone? It changes which row_type you write and what the label should say.
  * A make-up day marked "if needed" or "inclement weather". It is a school day, a student
    holiday, or undecided, and the district text almost never says which.
  * A grading-period boundary the text does not state. Do not infer one from the neighbouring
    period's end date.
  * A report-card date the text does not give. Leave report_issue_date empty; it is optional.
  * A stretch the district simply does not mention, such as the weeks between coverage start and
    the first student day.
  * OCR from a photographed or scanned calendar. Flag any digit or range you are unsure of
    instead of quietly settling on the plausible reading.

WORKED EXAMPLE

Pasted text, from a fictional district. Messy on purpose, because they all are:

  NORTHWIND ISD [fictional] 2030-2031 STUDENT CALENDAR (board approved 03/12/30)
  First day for students ......... Mon Aug 19
  Labor Day - all campuses closed .. Sep 2
  1st Nine Weeks  8/19 - 10/18    report cards 10/25
  Staff Development / Student Holiday - Oct 21
  2nd Nine Weeks  10/21 - 12/20   report cards 1/16
  Thanksgiving Break  Nov 25-29
  Winter Break  Dec 23 - Jan 3
  MLK Jr. Day  Jan 20
  3rd Nine Weeks  1/6 - 3/14      Spring Break 3/17-3/21
  Bad weather make-up day (if needed): Feb 17
  4th Nine Weeks  3/24 - 5/30     Last day 5/30, report cards mailed 6/5
  Early release, 12:45 dismissal - Apr 2
  Memorial Day - May 26

Before writing a single row, ask two things: is Feb 17 a school day this year or a student
holiday, and does the teacher want the Apr 2 early release set up now, since it is a Bell Schedule
plus a date change and not part of this CSV. With coverage confirmed as 2030-07-01 to 2031-06-30
and Feb 17 confirmed as a school day, the CSV is:

  school_year,row_type,code,name,start_date,end_date,report_issue_date,basis
  2030-31,Academic Period,Q1,1st Nine Weeks,2030-08-19,2030-10-18,2030-10-25,district calendar
  2030-31,Academic Period,Q2,2nd Nine Weeks,2030-10-21,2030-12-20,2031-01-16,district calendar
  2030-31,Academic Period,Q3,3rd Nine Weeks,2031-01-06,2031-03-14,,district calendar
  2030-31,Academic Period,Q4,4th Nine Weeks,2031-03-24,2031-05-30,2031-06-05,district calendar
  2030-31,No School for Students,,Summer - before first day,2030-07-01,2030-08-18,,coverage start
  2030-31,Holiday,,Labor Day,2030-09-02,2030-09-02,,district calendar
  2030-31,No School for Students,,Staff Development,2030-10-21,2030-10-21,,district calendar
  2030-31,Holiday,,Thanksgiving Break,2030-11-25,2030-11-29,,district calendar
  2030-31,Holiday,,Winter Break,2030-12-23,2031-01-03,,district calendar
  2030-31,Holiday,,MLK Jr. Day,2031-01-20,2031-01-20,,district calendar
  2030-31,Holiday,,Spring Break,2031-03-17,2031-03-21,,district calendar
  2030-31,Holiday,,Memorial Day,2031-05-26,2031-05-26,,district calendar
  2030-31,No School for Students,,Summer - after last day,2031-05-31,2031-06-30,,coverage end

What that example is demonstrating, row by row:

  * Every ambiguous month got a year. "Jan 3" is 2031, and Winter Break is one row spanning the
    boundary rather than two rows split at it.
  * Q3 carries no report_issue_date because the pasted text gives none. Empty beats invented.
  * Oct 21 is both the start of Q2 and a student holiday. That is legal and normal: a
    grading-period bound does not have to be an instructional day.
  * Staff Development is No School for Students, not Holiday, and keeps the district's own name.
  * The two summer rows exist because coverage runs July to June while the student year is August
    to May. Without them, the seven weeks before the first day and the month after the last day
    would all become instructional days on the default Bell Schedule.
  * Feb 17 appears nowhere, because it was confirmed as an ordinary school day, and ordinary
    school days are never rows in this file.
  * Apr 2 appears nowhere either. It is an instructional day, so it is a short Bell Schedule plus
    preview_school_calendar_change — a separate conversation once the year exists.

Row order does not matter to the parser or to grading-period validation, which sorts before
checking for overlaps. Group them however reads best for the teacher.

A last word on what to keep out. The calendar is public, student-free school configuration.
Public district dates and bell times belong in it. Student data, teacher contact details, the body
of the email the principal sent, Canvas credentials, and workspace paths do not.
